# Degeneration of Soviet Revisionist Renegades as Seen from Their Concoction of “Communist Christianity”

*By Yu Fen, in Hung-ch’i (Red Flag) No. 8 (August 1, 1969)*

*This is a digitisation by https://twitter.com/jnzst of the translation of this essay found in "Religious policy and practice in Communist China: a documentary history" by Donald E. MacInnis.*

Not long ago, a small farce was staged on the outskirts of Moscow under the “auspices” of the Soviet revisionist chieftains. Bishops and priests as well as monks and imams, religious chiefs numbering more than one hundred from all over the Soviet Union, attended a conference boisterously to discuss what they called “essential problems of our epoch.” A bigwig of the Soviet revisionist renegade clique sent the conference a personal message wishing their performance a success and bidding them “to make contribution to the noble cause of consolidation of universal peace.”

This is an extremely reactionary step taken by Brezhnev and the handful of other Soviet revisionist renegades who vigorously advocate religion and superstition in a vain attempt to fool the people of the Soviet Union and the world and to use the frocks of the bishops and priests to cover up the crimes they have committed at home and abroad.

The great Lenin severely denounced the revisionists of all shades and hues as hens among dung heaps in the backyard of the working class movement. They would peck at anything, however filthy, so long as it could keep them alive. The Soviet revisionist renegade clique, beset with difficulties at home and abroad, has long sought the service of the reactionary religious forces in carrying out its counter-revolutionary “revisionist domestic and foreign policies. The Soviet revisionist renegade clique has long been a disgusting sycophant of the Vatican bulwark of the most reactionary religious forces in the world and the Pope, the loyal defender of capitalism. The notorious Khrushchev shamelessly praised the Pop as a “great man” “devoted to world peace.” After Khrushchev, a new Soviet revisionist chieftain made a “pilgrimage” to Rome in the capacity as head of State and sought audience with Pope Paul VI. At home, the Soviet revisionist renegade clique does all it can to inflate the arrogance of the religious forces. It vigorously carries out reactionary religious propaganda through its press and news agencies, shamelessly trumpeting that religion, an opiate, is “beneficial,” and clamoring for the restoration of religious education in schools. The religious forces have become daily more rampant and all-pervasive in the Soviet Union. The number of religious rites held in the Soviet Union in the past ten years increased threefold or fourfold, the number of churches and parishes increased day by day, and the number of religious believers reached dozens of millions. Many theological seminaries have been set up to train “successors” to the church.

Of late, the Soviet revisionist renegade clique has cooked up the reactionary fallacy of “communist Christianity” and published lengthy articles in the press advertising the “evolution of the modern Russian Orthodox Church.” In the fifth issue of the journal “Science and Religion,” a hired “candidate doctor of philosophy” went so far as to allege, in the typical tune of a priest, that the Russian Orthodox Church is an “instrument for transforming social relations,” that Christianity is harmonious, fitting, and in coordination with the process of transforming social relations on socialist and communist principles” and that Christianity has developed into “communist Christianity.” Like revisionism—the sham Marxism-Leninism mouthed by the Soviet revisionists, this “communist Christianity,” so it was said, is most enthusiastic in “calling on the believers to take part in the struggle for socialism and socialist construction.” Brezhnev and company can now most conveniently find in “communist Christianity” a blue-print for “building communism.” They have even thrown to the four winds their Marxist-Leninist garb because “in the Russian Orthodox Church, the building of the kingdom of Christ on earth is more and more associated with communist transformation of the world.” It was amidst such loud trumpeting for “communist Christianity” that the church heads in some areas flagrantly called meetings in public places, conducted propaganda among the inhabitants, and “recruited supporters.” What miasma!

Where can one find anything more shameless!

In the eyes of the Soviet revisionist renegades, they have only to put the label “communism” on Christianity and they will be able to deceive the people at home and the revolutionary people of the world and provide themselves with a fig leaf to cover up their all-round restoration of capitalism by making use of the church and their pursuance of social-imperialist policies. In fact, this precisely reveals that their so-called “building of communism” is the same stuff as the “building of the kingdom of Christ,” that they are taking the most reactionary idealist stand of the big landlords and big bourgeoisie in making use of religion and that their program is the same as the deceitful propaganda about “communist Christianity.”

The proletariat is determined to overthrow completely the bourgeoisie and all other exploiting classes, replace the dictatorship of the proletariat, defeat capitalism with socialism, and eventually realize communism. “Religion is opium for the people.” It is a spiritual weapon of the exploiting classes for oppression, enslaving and exploiting the laboring people; It fetters the oppressed classes, preventing them from rebelling against the oppressors. Scientific communism and religion are antagonistic. The struggle for the realization of the ideals of communism in the whole world and “the building of the kingdom of Christ on earth” are incompatible with each other like fire and water.

The “Manifesto of the Communist Party” solemnly declares that the communist revolution’s “development involves the most radical rupture with traditional ideas.” Since the great theory of scientific Communism came into being, it has been frantically resisted by the reactionary religious forces represented by the Pope. Lenin pointed out: “We must combat religion—that is the ABC of all materialism, and consequently of Marxism.” The Party and Soviet state led by Lenin and Stalin waged a resolute struggle against the reactionary religious forces. Now, the gang of Soviet revisionist renegades who claim to be loyal to the behest of Lenin have shamelessly alleged that Christianity and communism are “harmonious, fitting and in coordination” with each other; they have combined communism and Christianity into one and flaunted the black flag of “communist Christianity.” This shows to what despicable depth they have sunk. Listen, bigwigs of the Soviet revisionist renegade clique! You want to act as Christian “bishops” to dupe and hoodwink the Soviet people and the people of the world and at the same time you want to crown yourself with the wreath of “communism” so as to whitewash your treacherous acts. Don’t you find this too ugly a farce?

Since the emergence of Marxism in the world, all the reactionary forces and revisionists of various descriptions have tried in vain to “combine” communism with religion. This was the tactic used by the “god-building” school severely denounced by Lenin. The so-called “evolution” of religion in the Soviet Union and “socialization” of religion as well as the “association” of “the kingdom of Christ” with communism, and so on and so forth—all this is sheer deceitful religious propaganda. Many fashionable theologians are now busily engaged in “reforms.” They rack their brains every day in search of a “more effective form of expression” of Christianity from theological theories. They oppose what they called “flagrant infringement of atheistic materials and communism upon human dignity”; they wildly clamor for “extending the kingdom of Christ to the very limit of the
earth,” and “propagating gospel” among the proletariat. However, all these tricks fail to match those of today’s Soviet revisionist renegade clique. The Soviet revisionist renegades have come out as “communist” theologians to prove that the ideals of Christianity had been translated into reality in their sham communism. Why is it that the Soviet religious bosses now consider it possible to give energetic support to the political and philosophical propositions of the Soviet revisionist renegade clique? They have let the cat out of the bag themselves. It turned out that they support the political “principles” of the Soviet revisionist renegade clique because “these principles accord with the needs of Christianity.” It was none other than Khrushchev, Brezhnev, and their gang who, after coming to power, have turned the bourgeoisie’s “hope of restoration” into “attempts at restoration,” usurped the leadership of the party of Lenin and Stalin and turned the world’s first state under the dictatorship of the proletariat into a dark fascist state under the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie. The reactionary religious bosses found such a “process” of capitalist restoration very “harmonious, fitting, and in coordination” with their desires and that is why they have applauded it and strained themselves to serve the Soviet revisionist renegade clique.

In playing up “communist Christianity,” the Soviet revisionist renegade clique has lauded religion as an “instrument for transforming social relations.” Such brazen utterance can only show up more clearly the heinous features of the Soviet revisionist renegades who are accelerating all-round capitalist restoration with the help of the reactionary religious forces. In class society, religion has always been an instrument of the exploiting classes for dominating, enslaving, and poisoning the minds of the laboring people. Karl Marx, the great teacher of the proletariat, said: “The social principles of Christianity had justified ancient slavery, extolled medieval serfdom, and, when necessary, will also defend, although with a look of pity, the oppression of the proletariat.” Therefore, all the reactionary ruling classes in history supported and made use of religion. This was done by the slave-owners of slave society, the landlords of feudal society, and the capitalists of capitalist society. The Soviet people will never forget how the old Tsars always used the Russian Orthodox Church as an instrument for maintaining the sanguinary rule in their feudal empire. Right after the founding of the Soviet power, the overthrown reactionary ruling classes, with a view to seizing back their lost paradise, organized an anti-Soviet “crusade” with the help of the reactionary religious forces and in coordination with international imperialism to subvert the first socialist state. Still less will the Chinese people forget how the imperialists used religion as an instrument for cultural aggression and, later, military and political aggression against our country, turning her into a semi-colonial and semi-feudal country. Immediately after the founding of the great People’s Republic of China, the imperialists made use of the reactionary religious forces as their instrument to poison the minds of a section of the people who were backward and to subvert and undermine our country. A handful of counter-revolutionaries, under the cloak of Catholicism or Protestantism, has always been an anti-communist, anti-people task force of imperialism and an imperialist instrument for aggression. That the Soviet revisionist renegade clique uses the Russian Orthodox Church as an “instrument for transforming social relations” is nothing new. This is merely a mantle inherited from the old Tsars and a piece of shop-worn junk picked up from US imperialism.

While creating the reactionary theory of “communist Christianity,” the Soviet revisionist renegade clique, which is capable of committing every evil and scandal, openly lauded in its press the Russian Orthodox Church heads for carrying out its “international policy” and supporting its “efforts in ensuring international security.” It has thus confessed to its counter-revolutionary aims in making use of the reactionary religious forces to push its social-imperialist policy. At present, the Soviet revisionist renegade clique is stepping up its collusion with US imperialism, intensifying its suppression of the revolutionary struggle of the people of various countries, and strengthening its control and exploitation of the East European countries and the People’s Republic of Mongolia. These criminal activities of the Soviet revisionist renegade clique prove that the “international policy” of the Soviet revisionists has become an imperialist policy of mustering all reactionary forces to carry out expansion abroad.

While incessantly making intrusions into the territory and air space of our country and shooting to death empty-handed Chinese fishermen and herdsmen, the Soviet revisionist renegade clique has been making use of religion to carry out counter-revolutionary subversive propaganda through its radios beamed toward China’s Sinkiang Province in an attempt to split the unity of our motherland and disrupt the national solidarity of our country. The old Tsars used religion to carry out divisive activities in Sinkiang, and now the Soviet revisionist renegade clique is doing the same. This fact has enabled the people of the world to see clearly once again that this handful of renegades are downright social-imperialists and out-and-out new Tsars. We sternly warn the chieftains of the Soviet revisionist renegade clique: You will come to no good end in using reactionary clergymen to carry out counter-revolutionary activities!

Chairman Mao, the great leader of all the nationalities of our country, pointed out in his work “On Coalition Government”: “All religions are permitted in China’s liberated areas, in accordance with the principle of freedom of religious belief. All believers in Protestantism, Catholicism, Islam, Buddhism, and other faiths enjoy the protection of the People’s Government so long as they are abiding by its laws. Everyone is free to believe or not to believe; neither compulsion nor discrimination is permitted.” We consistently advocate protection of the freedom of religious belief and the freedom of not believing in religion. Communists follow a policy of freedom of religious belief; but towards religious believers “We can never approve of their idealism or religious doctrines.” We must repudiate idealism, monasticism and all kinds of religious superstition. We are convinced that the time will come when the religious believers will become awakened and cast away the “gods.” To maintain its counter-revolutionary revisionist rule, the Soviet revisionist renegade clique has completely betrayed the rudimentary principles of Marxism-Leninism, acted perversely, and gone so far as to concoct the reactionary fallacy of “communist Christianity.” This shows to what depth they have degenerated politically and ideologically, reflecting at the same time their mortal fear of the doom confronting them.

Has not the Soviet revisionist renegade clique told the religious heads under its pay to discuss the so-called “essential problems of our epoch”? The essential problem of our epoch, as pointed out by Vice-chairman Lin Piao in his political report to the Ninth National Congress of the Communist Party of China, is: “The contradiction between the oppressed nations on the one hand and imperialism and social-imperialism on the other; the contradiction between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie in the capitalist and revisionist countries; the contradiction between imperialist and social-imperialist countries and among the imperialist countries; and the contradiction between socialist countries on the one hand and imperialism and social-imperialism on the other. The existence and development of these contradictions are bound to give rise to revolution.” US imperialism, Soviet revisionism, and all reaction in the world can never survive this great storm of people’s revolution, nor can “communist Christianity” save the Soviet revisionist renegade clique from its doom.

Owing to the fact that the Soviet revisionist renegade clique is carrying out the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie over the Soviet people and pursuing a social-imperialist policy of expansion abroad, acute class differentiation and bitter class struggle are taking place in the Soviet society. The Soviet revisionist chieftains merely indulge in daydreaming and are wasting their efforts in trying to use the religious forces to benumb and disintegrate the revolutionary fighting will of the Soviet people in rebellion against the Soviet revisionist renegade clique. It can only promote the daily awakening of the Soviet people and arouse them to greater resistance; it can only enable the people all over the world to see more clearly the depravity and shamelessness of this gang of renegades. Now, the revolutionary movement of the proletariat of the world and the people of all countries is surging forward vigorously and the struggle of the Soviet proletariat and the broad masses of the Soviet people against the Soviet revisionist renegade clique is developing in depth. The imperialists, revisionists and reactionaries are heading step by step for their graves. As pointed out by Chairman Mao, the great leader of all the nationalities of our country, “Working hand in glove, Soviet revisionism and US imperialism have done so many foul and evil things that the revolutionary people the world over will not let them go unpunished, The people of all countries are rising. A new historical period of struggle against US imperialism and Soviet revisionism has begun.” The Soviet revisionist renegade clique is seeking help from the reactionary religious forces to wage a last-ditch struggle. This can only bring them to a quicker and more miserable defeat. This is also the will of “god.” This “god” is none other than the proletariat and revolutionary people of the world, the Soviet people included.
